ABSTRACT: Preimplantation genetic testing comprises a group of genetic assays used to evaluate embryos before transfer to the uterus. Preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic is targeted to single gene disorders, and preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy is a broader test that screens for aneuploidy in all chromosomes, including the 22 pairs of autosomes and the sex chromosomes X and Y. To test embryos that are at risk for chromosome gains and losses related to parental structural chromosomal abnormalities (eg, translocations, inversions, deletions, and insertions), preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements is used. Independent of the preimplantation genetic testing modality employed, false-positive and false-negative results are possible. Patients and health care providers should be aware that a “normal” or negative preimplantation genetic test result is not a guarantee of a newborn without genetic abnormalities. Traditional diagnostic testing or screening for aneuploidy should be offered to all patients who have had preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, in accordance with recommendations for all pregnant patients. It is especially important to offer diagnostic testing or screening for aneuploidy after preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic or preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements if concurrent preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy is not performed. Many limitations exist to preimplantation genetic testing and include challenges in detecting microdeletions and microduplications, de novo variants, and imprinting disorders. An emerging problem has been detection of mosaicism during preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy. The clinical utility of preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic and preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements is firmly established; however, the best use of preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy remains to be determined. Future research is necessary to establish the overall clinical utility for preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, the subset of patients that may benefit from preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, the clinical significance of mosaicism, and residual risk for aneuploidy in preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy screened embryos.
Recommendations

    Preimplantation genetic testing comprises a group of genetic assays used to evaluate embryos before transfer to the uterus. Preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic (known as PGT-M) is targeted to single gene disorders. Preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic uses only a few cells from the early embryo, usually at the blastocyst stage, and misdiagnosis is possible but rare with modern techniques. Confirmation of preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic results with chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis should be offered.

    To detect structural chromosomal abnormalities such as translocations, preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements (known as PGT-SR) is used. Confirmation of preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements results with CVS or amniocentesis should be offered.

    The main purpose of preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy (known as PGT-A) is to screen embryos for whole chromosome abnormalities. Traditional diagnostic testing or screening for aneuploidy should be offered to all patients who have had preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, in accordance with recommendations for all pregnant patients.

Introduction

As preimplantation genetic technologies are increasingly used with in vitro fertilization, obstetric care providers should become familiar with these tests as well as their benefits and limitations. Preimplantation genetic testing comprises a group of genetic assays used to evaluate embryos before transfer to the uterus. Preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic is targeted to single gene disorders, and preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy is a broader test that screens for aneuploidy in all chromosomes, including the 22 pairs of autosomes and the sex chromosomes, X and Y. To detect structural chromosomal abnormalities such as translocations, preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements is used

Preimplantation genetic testing has been performed on polar bodies, a single blastomere from a cleavage-stage embryo, and a group of cells from the trophectoderm at the blastocyst stage. The latter has become the most common methodology used. In this methodology, preimplantation genetic testing is performed on approximately 5–10 cells derived from the trophectoderm layer that gives rise to the placenta and does not require a biopsy of the inner cell mass, which ultimately gives rise to the fetus. Because of possible mosaicism, preimplantation genetic testing results from the trophectoderm may not reflect the genetic constitution of the inner cell mass 1. Independent of the preimplantation genetic testing modality employed, false-positive and false-negative results are possible.

Preimplantation genetic testing raises several ethical issues that are beyond the scope of this document. For example, there are complexities to offering preimplantation genetic testing to screen for adult-onset disorders or to determine transplantation compatibility for ill family members 2. Such issues are addressed extensively in the bioethics literature as well as documents from ACOG 3 and the American Society of Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) 4.
Preimplantation Genetic Testing for Monogenic Disorders

Preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic is used to test for a specific genetic pathogenic variant (mutation) associated with a known diagnosis or known predisposition within a family. Preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic does not test for all single gene disorders at once and will not detect de novo pathogenic variants. This technique examines embryos using either cytogenetic or molecular techniques for (1) single-gene disorders (eg, Huntington disease, cystic fibrosis, fragile X syndrome), including those that are autosomal dominant and recessive or X-linked, or (2) hereditary cancer syndromes (eg, hereditary breast and ovarian cancer, Lynch syndrome). Additionally, preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic can be used to identify human leukocyte antigen-compatible, unaffected embryos gestated with the goal of allowing ill family members to receive compatible bone marrow transplants or cord blood transfusions. Preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic uses only a few cells from the early embryo, usually at the blastocyst stage, and misdiagnosis is possible but rare with modern techniques. Laboratories often quote a small risk for misdiagnosis; however, no cases of misdiagnosis were reported in the data from the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology Consortium 5. Regardless, confirmation of preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic results with CVS or amniocentesis should be offered.
Preimplantation Genetic Testing for Structural Rearrangements

To test embryos that are at risk for chromosome gains and losses related to parental structural chromosomal abnormalities (eg translocations, inversions, deletions, and insertions), preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements is used. Genetic counseling and discussion of possible preimplantation genetic testing should be offered when a structural rearrangement is discovered in a parent. At this time, preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements cannot differentiate between an embryo that has a normal karyotype and an embryo that carries a balanced form of the familial chromosome rearrangement. Individuals who carry a balanced chromosome rearrangement involving imprinted genes (eg, 13;14 robertsonian translocation) are at risk for abnormalities related to uniparental disomy, which cannot be excluded by all methods of preimplantation genetic testing analysis. Because of these limitations, and the fact that this testing method uses only a few trophectoderm cells, confirmation of preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements results with CVS or amniocentesis should be offered.
Preimplantation Genetic Testing for Aneuploidy

The main purpose of PGT-A is to screen embryos for whole chromosome abnormalities. Before its use, the selection of embryos for transfer was based mainly on morphologic criteria, but many women failed to achieve pregnancy despite transfer of morphologically optimal embryos. Preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy was proposed as a way to detect whole chromosome aneuploidy before transfer and thus potentially increase live birth rates and decrease early pregnancy failure rates 6 7. The original technique used fluorescence in situ hybridization but was limited to just a few chromosomes. Preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy has now expanded to include assessment of all the chromosomes, through various techniques such as array comparative genomic hybridization and next generation sequencing. 8.

The initial interest in preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy through fluorescence in situ hybridization was tempered by the publication of randomized studies that did not find improved in vitro fertilization (IVF) outcomes 9 10. Proposed explanations included the fact that biopsy of the early cleavage stage embryo (day 3) appears to negatively affect implantation potential 11 and single-cell biopsy precludes confirmatory testing. At the time, several major medical societies subsequently released opinions discouraging routine use of preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy 12 13.

In an effort to continue the quest toward higher live birth rates and lower multiple gestation rates in IVF, ongoing research pursued emerging techniques. These involved biopsy of the multiple cell trophectoderm (future placenta) of the blastocyst. In addition, several platforms capable of testing all chromosomes have been developed. These platforms differ in their ability to identify other anomalies simultaneously, such as structural abnormalities, single gene mutations, mitochondrial copy number, and mosaicism 8.

A systematic review examined the clinical effectiveness of preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy and found three randomized controlled trials that reported higher pregnancy rates in younger patients with no previous failed IVF attempts; however, these were small studies with substantial limitations 14. Another randomized controlled trial found that women aged 38–41 had significantly higher live birth rates and lower miscarriage rates after preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, as well as a shorter time to pregnancy. However, the comparison is problematic because in the preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy group, 32% of patients did not have an embryo to transfer 15. After a comprehensive review, ASRM published a practice guideline in March of 2018 concluding that “there is insufficient evidence to recommend the routine use of preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy in all infertile women.” In addition, the ideal genetic testing platform to analyze all chromosomes has not yet been established 16. Worldwide randomized controlled trials are needed to determine which patient cohorts, if any, may benefit from preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy.

Traditional diagnostic testing or screening for aneuploidy should be offered to all patients who have had preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, in accordance with recommendations for all pregnant patients.
Prenatal Genetic Screening and Testing After Preimplantation Genetic Testing

Because preimplantation genetic testing cannot identify all genetic abnormalities in a fetus, counseling about prenatal genetic screening or testing should be a process of shared decision making with a focus on the patient’s individual risk, reproductive goals, and preferences. For example, current preimplantation genetic testing cannot detect all microdeletions or microduplications, nor will it detect de novo pathogenic variants. Patients and health care providers should be aware that a negative preimplantation genetic test result is not a guarantee of a newborn without genetic abnormalities. False-positive and false-negative results can occur with preimplantation genetic testing, therefore, prenatal diagnostic testing (through CVS or amniocentesis) should be offered to all patients who have achieved pregnancy after preimplantation genetic testing. However, there are patients who, because of the associated risk of miscarriage, decline diagnostic testing and choose prenatal screening (first-trimester and second-trimester serologic testing, nuchal translucency screening, or cell-free DNA testing), as do many patients who have not elected preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy. Patients who choose screening after preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy should be made aware of the substantial limitations of this strategy and the potential for a false-positive test result. It is especially important to offer diagnostic testing or screening for aneuploidy after preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic or preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements if concurrent preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy is not performed. As preimplantation genetic testing is used more over time, data will be available to help determine the optimal prenatal testing and screening strategies for this patient population. For a full discussion of screening and diagnostic testing for aneuploidy in pregnancy, see ACOG Practice Bulletin Number 162, Prenatal Diagnostic Testing for Genetic Disorders, and ACOG Practice Bulletin Number 163, Screening for Fetal Aneuploidy.
Preimplantation Genetic Testing and Mosaicism, an Emerging Conundrum

Many limitations exist to preimplantation genetic testing and include challenges in detecting microdeletions and microduplications, de novo variants, and imprinting disorders. An emerging problem has been detection of mosaicism during preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy. Mosaicism is defined as two or more cell populations with different chromosomal complements present within the same embryo 16. Traditionally, embryos with mosaicism detected on preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy have not been used for transfer in IVF because it is assumed they will not develop into euploid fetuses at term. It is important to understand that preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy testing was not originally intended to confirm a diagnosis of mosaicism. Recent application of advanced genetic technologies, such as next generation sequencing, has allowed mosaicism to be detected with greater sensitivity, with an incidence as high as 20% of tested embryos 17. Numerous reasons for the apparent mosaicism exist, and some are more likely to result in a healthy live-born infant than others. 18. Several studies have shown term delivery of euploid fetuses after mosaic embryo transfer, albeit with lower pregnancy rates. Proposed etiologies for this success include self-correction of the mosaicism or inaccuracy of the initial embryo biopsy 19 20. Given this data, some patients may choose to implant select embryos with mosaicism detected on preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, after detailed consent and counseling. Referral to a specialist with genetic training and expertise should be considered, and prenatal diagnosis with CVS or amniocentesis should be strongly encouraged.
Future Directions

The clinical utility of preimplantation genetic testing-monogenic and preimplantation genetic testing-structural rearrangements is firmly established; however, the best use of preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy remains to be determined. At this time, in concordance with ASRM recommendations, there is insufficient evidence to recommend the routine use of preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy in all infertile women.

The cost effectiveness of preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy is difficult to quantify because of the intangible costs of failed implantation and spontaneous loss, as well as variability in treatment costs. In addition, preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy may prove to be a factor in decreasing the multiple gestation associated with IVF because of the current recommendation of single euploid embryo transfer regardless of age 21 22. Future research is necessary to establish the overall clinical utility for preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, the subset of patients that may benefit from preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy, the clinical significance of mosaicism, and the residual risk for aneuploidy in preimplantation genetic testing-aneuploidy screened embryos

Preimplantation Genetic Testing (PGT)
Medically Reviewed.Last updated on 02/10/2026.

Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) is a test that allows fertility specialists to check an embryo’s genetic material before the IVF transfer process. It can distinguish healthy embryos from embryos that have chromosomal or genetic abnormalities.
Contents
What Is Preimplantation Genetic Testing (PGT)?
Test Details
Results and Follow-Up
Additional Common Questions
What Is Preimplantation Genetic Testing (PGT)?

Preimplantation genetic testing (or PGT) is a type of genetic test healthcare providers can perform on embryos created through in-vitro fertilization (IVF). It allows your fertility specialist to screen embryos for certain genetic or chromosomal conditions before they transfer the embryo into your uterus.

Embryos with these types of conditions have a lower chance of implantation and a higher chance of miscarriage. Results of PGT testing allows couples to select embryos that don’t contain genetic or chromosomal disorders, which then increases their chances of a healthy pregnancy. It can also prevent them from passing on a potentially life-threatening condition to their child.

PGT is a tool fertility specialists can use to help couples pursuing IVF achieve the best chance at a healthy pregnancy and healthy child. It can prevent you from passing down a genetic disease or continuing with the IVF process when it’s likely to be unsuccessful. It can also help couples select the embryo that has the sex they desire.

PGT is different from a prenatal genetic test called a carrier screen. The genetic carrier screening can detect small changes in the genes of the birth parents. If both you and your partner are carriers of the same condition, the embryo you create has a higher chance of having that single-gene condition. People who are carriers of single-gene conditions may choose to have PGT to test their embryos.

PGT is also called:

    PGT or preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD)
    PGS or preimplantation genetic screening (PGS)

Couples considering PGT should talk to their healthcare team about the risks and benefits of testing their embryos. A genetic counselor can also help you understand your situation and recommend the type of testing that’s right for you.
What are reasons for getting PGT?

People undergoing IVF may choose preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) to check embryos for genetic and/or chromosomal conditions. This information can help prevent transferring an embryo with a significant medical condition or one that is less likely to implant and more likely lead to miscarriage.

You may decide to have this test if:

    Either you or your partner has a history of inheritable genetic mutations, including conditions like cystic fibrosis
    You have a history of recurrent miscarriage due to chromosomal abnormalities
    You’re of advanced age and at risk of having children with a chromosomal abnormality, like Down syndrome
    You have unexplained infertility or a history of unsuccessful fertility treatment

Types of PGT

Fertility specialists can perform three different types of preimplantation genetic testing:

    Preimplantation genetic screening for abnormal chromosome number (PGT-A).
    Preimplantation genetic testing for monogenic (or single gene) disease (PGT-M).
    Preimplantation genetic testing for chromosomal rearrangements (PGT-SR).

PGT-A

The “A” stands for aneuploid, which is a condition where a cell has excess or missing chromosomes. It’s one of the leading causes of failed implantation and miscarriage. This type of test checks whether the embryo has 46 chromosomes (23 from each parent). An embryo that has more or fewer than 46 chromosomes is less likely to result in a healthy pregnancy. Examples of chromosomal disorders include Down syndrome, Turner syndrome and Patau syndrome.
PGT-M

This test checks the embryo for a specific condition that one (or both) of the birth parents carries. When both parents are carriers of genetic conditions, the chance of them passing it on to their child is higher. This test checks the embryo for such conditions. Examples of single-gene diseases are sickle cell anemia, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and spinal muscular atrophy.

It also identifies human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-compatible embryos. This is helpful when a sibling of the developing embryo needs a bone marrow transplant.
PGT-SR

Chromosomal rearrangements describe chromosomes that appear structurally different. The main types of rearrangements are inversion and translocation. Both types mean that the genetic material of the embryo contains errors that could lead to serious health problems and repeat miscarriages.
Test Details
How does PGT work?

Preimplantation testing is only available for couples pursuing IVF treatment. In a typical IVF cycle, your fertility specialist selects embryos to transfer into your uterus based on their appearance under a microscope. This can give them clues about the health of the embryo.

Preimplantation testing takes this a step further and gives them much more data on the genetic and chromosomal makeup of the embryo. This information allows fertility specialists and couples to select embryos that have the greatest chance of successful implantation and development.

Specific steps in preimplantation genetic testing include the following:

    A healthcare specialist called an embryologist fertilizes eggs with sperm in a lab dish and allows them to grow into embryos.
    Once the embryo reaches a certain stage in development (blastocyst stage), an embryologist removes a few cells from the outside layer of the embryo (this is called an embryo biopsy).
    They send the cells to a lab for genetic testing.
    The results of the genetic testing allow your embryologist to exclude the affected embryos from the IVF transfer process. They select embryos that come back normal, as these embryos have the greatest chance of implantation.

Are there risks?

No, there aren’t any additional risks to PGT beyond the typical risks of IVF. Testing a few cells from external layers of the developing embryo hasn’t shown any negative impact on the embryo.

PGT adds time and expense to the IVF process. Talk to your fertility specialist or genetic counselor to see if they recommend preimplantation genetic testing.
Results and Follow-Up
What type of results do you get with PGT?

The results you get depend on the type of PGT testing you have, but most come back as either normal or abnormal.

    PGT-A test results are normal if the embryo has 46 chromosomes. Test results will be abnormal if the embryo has too many or too few chromosomes. But it can also come back as mosaic, which means it contains both normal and abnormal cells.
    PGT-M test results will also come back as normal or abnormal for each condition your embryologist screens for. If a result is normal, it means the embryo didn’t have that specific condition. If it comes back abnormal, it means the embryo contains the condition. The result might also come back as a carrier embryo.
    PGT-SR test results typically come back as normal or abnormal. A normal result means your embryologist didn’t detect any rearrangements in the chromosomes. An abnormal result means they found one or more rearrangements.

Are the results accurate?

Preimplantation testing can’t guarantee the embryo will be born without any health conditions. As with most tests, there’s a low chance the results aren’t accurate. For this reason, pregnancy care providers recommend having amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS) during pregnancy to confirm the results of PGT.
Additional Common Questions
Why is PGT controversial?

Some people believe certain medical interventions are unethical. Health topics like euthanasia, for example, can often be divisive because everyone has their own opinion of what’s morally right or wrong.

Many people believe that “selecting” embryos isn’t ethical because of a practice called eugenics. Eugenics is selecting or choosing desirable genetic or hereditary traits to improve the human species. Historically, eugenics was discriminatory and led to horrific practices. Critics of PGT say it’s a slippery slope and could lead to a way to reject or eliminate populations of people with genetic disabilities or diseases. But advocates believe it’s a way to prevent unnecessary suffering and pain.
Is PGT legal in the United States?

Yes, it’s legal to have preimplantation genetic testing in the U.S. There’s no government regulation of the practice. This means anyone can have PGT for any reason, and it’s entirely at the discretion of the fertility clinic. This raises ethical questions from many groups of people. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is working on ways to regulate PGT. Many experts expect there to be laws in place eventually.
A note from Cleveland Clinic

IVF can be extremely challenging for couples. It can be emotionally, physically and financially demanding, and there’s no guarantee it will result in a pregnancy. Genetic or chromosomal disorders in an embryo are common reasons IVF fails. But preimplantation genetic testing can help increase your chances of a successful IVF pregnancy because it can identify these disorders before embryo transfer.

It allows you and your fertility specialist to select healthy embryos with the best chances of growing into a healthy baby. This can be extremely beneficial to some couples. If you’re considering PGT, talk to your genetic counselor about what they recommend. They can discuss the advantages of testing with you and help you decide if it’s right for you and your family.

Can We Create Designer Babies with Gene Editing?

    What is a designer baby?
    Why consider it?
    Ethical concerns
    Takeaway

Designer babies may sound like science fiction, but they’re becoming increasingly possible as gene editing technology to treat and prevent genetic diseases evolves. How scientists should use it is a topic for debate.

Scientists reconfiguring embryonic genes to create a “designer baby” seems like something from a sci-fi movie. Not so fast.

The science is here. But is it truly possible? And if it’s possible, should scientists use it?

Genetic testing on embryos and fetuses has been around for years. It lets doctors and future parents know about chronic conditions or disorders that occur during fetal development before a baby is born.

In vitro fertilization (IVF), in which experts fertilize an egg outside the uterus and then implant it into a person’s body, also allows doctors and potential parents to preselect the healthiest embryos before implantation.

Gene editing goes one step further. It allows scientists to remove, add, or change genes to prevent or treat certain diseases. If successful, this could prevent the transmission of genetic diseases to future generations. In the future, parents may also be able to choose the genetic traits of their unborn baby.

But how far can, and should, science go?
What is considered a designer baby?

A designer baby, or a genetically modified baby, forms when scientists edit or change an embryo’s genes during IVF to create an infant with characteristics the parents may consider more desirable. A change might include removing genes that could lead to chronic health conditions or trying to ensure a baby has certain physical characteristics.

The main scientific goal of creating designer babies is to prevent and stop the transmission of heritable diseases. However, while the technology for this type of gene editing exists, experts don’t consider it safe or effective for widespread use.

Current IVF standards allow some embryos to go through preimplantation genetic testing (PGT), which screens the embryos for certain genetic diseases. Occasionally, sex selection may also occur at this point. However, experts consider this process a form of genetic screening, not genetic modification.

The advancement of CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing technology allows scientists to precisely edit DNA strands. These edits could treat and prevent the inheritance of specific genetic diseases.

While the use of CRISPR-Cas9 shows great potential for treating certain diseases in adults and at the embryonic stage, any use of CRISPR-Cas9 in humans is still in trial phases and experimental.
Do designer babies exist today?

Doctors regularly perform IVF and PGT on preimplanted embryos to screen for certain genetic conditions and ensure a healthy baby.

Controversially, they may also perform sex selection during the embryo selection phase of IVF. Beyond this, many countries have regulations for birthing babies after gene editing. Science doesn’t show that gene editing is safe or effective for human embryos.

Heritable gene editingTrusted Source, also known as human germline editing, changes genes that the next generation could inherit. This type of gene editing poses greater safety and ethical risks than other types.

However, in 2018, a Chinese scientist created the world’s first genetically edited twin babies using CRISPR-Cas9 technology.

He changed the genes that allow HIV to enter cells, preventing the babies from contracting HIV in utero. He went to jail, and there was global criticism — but the babies were born healthy, and doctors continued to evaluate them for any possible issues.
Why might people want designer babies?

The idea of designer babies may sound attractive to prevent a baby from contracting heritable genetic diseases or conditions in utero.

Gene editing could eliminate certain inherited conditions, such as sickle cell anemia and cystic fibrosis. While it’s understandable to want to prevent babies from contracting these conditions, experts don’t consider the available science safe or effective.
What are the ethical concerns around designer babies?

While many people aren’t interested in crafting a “designer” baby — one with some ideal look, traits, and physical attributes — ethical concerns arise when it comes to changing human genes. Just how far should science go, even if it can?

Much of the gene editing available today is limited to cells other than egg and sperm cells. Somatic gene editing involves scientists isolating gene changes in specific tissues. But the transmission of these changes to future generations doesn’t occur.

However, germline editing could involve scientists making genetic changes that allow the transmission of the changes to future generations.

There is great controversy over how and when scientists should use this technology. Scientists debate whether they should use germline editing to enhance standard human traits like height or hair color. Many countries, including the United States, have banned embryo genome editing due to these ethical concerns.
Are designer babies legal in the United States?

In the United States, federal law prohibits the use of federal funds for research on human germline gene therapy, including research involving genetically edited embryos.

U.S. federal law also bans the use of implanting any genetically modified embryos into a uterus to establish pregnancy.

While some people may conduct privately funded research on germline gene editing, those studies can’t currently proceed through clinical trials involving humans. Experts widely accept that the safety and effectiveness of germline gene editing aren’t established well enough for clinical use.
Takeaway

Scientists form designer babies when they edit or change an embryo’s genes during IVF before its implantation into a uterus. U.S. experts currently don’t support the practice of creating designer babies via gene editing. However, PGT can identify healthier embryos before implantation.

CRISPR-Cas9 technology is a promising gene editing tool that can precisely edit DNA strands to eliminate specific genetic diseases. While it shows great potential, experts don’t consider its use as safe or effective for human embryos.

Gene editing poses several scientific and ethical concerns that experts continue to discuss worldwide


Ethical considerations of gene editing and genetic selection
Jodie Rothschild 1,✉

PMCID: PMC7260159  PMID: 32489755
Abstract

For thousands of years, humans have felt the need to understand the world around them—and ultimately manipulate it to best serve their needs. There are always ethical questions to address, especially when the manipulation involves the human genome. There is currently an urgent need to actively pursue those conversations as commercial gene sequencing and editing technologies have become more accessible and affordable. This paper explores the ethical considerations of gene editing (specifically germline) and genetic selection—including the hurdles researchers will face in trying to develop new technologies into viable therapeutic options.

Keywords: ethical, ethics, gene editing, genetic selection
1. BACKGROUND
1.1. Gene editing

Artificial manipulation of genes is a relatively new science, and a number of watershed moments have provided the foundation for the current state of genetic engineering. Researchers first discovered that nonspecific alterations to Drosophila DNA could be introduced using radiation 1 and chemicals 2 in 1927 and 1947, respectively. Greater understanding of the structure of the DNA molecule (such as the work of Watson, Crick, and Franklin, leading to the discovery of DNA’s double‐helix structure 3 ) and the cellular processes that govern its transcription, translation, replication, and repair (such as the function of ligases 4 and restriction enzymes 5 ) led to the first splicing experiments 6 and, ultimately, the first recombinant DNA 7 in the early 1970s. DNA recombination techniques were used extensively in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 8 , 9 beginning in the early 1980s, allowing researchers to study functional eukaryotic genomics. And in a significant advancement, the development of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) allowed scientists to amplify DNA, producing millions of copies from a single strand. 10

Around the same time, a number of laboratories created the first transgenic mice, 11 and about five years later, the first knockout mice were created. 12 Targeted gene editing was further advanced by the discovery that engineered endonucleases could create site‐specific double‐stranded breaks (DSBs), which in turn induce homologous recombination (HR), 13 , 15 the most common type of homology‐directed repair (HDR). When the Human Genome Project was declared complete in 2003, 15 it became possible to identify (and thus, theoretically, target) any human gene of interest.

The three main techniques for gene editing involve molecules that recognize and bind to specific DNA sequences; researchers can use custom molecules to affect genetic and epigenetic changes on essentially any gene. For example, these molecules can be combined with endonucleases, creating DSBs which can be repaired using either nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), which often results in small random indel mutations, or HDR, which, when donor DNA with homology to either side of the cleavage site is present, can be used to create new or “repaired” versions of a target gene. The site‐specific DNA recognition molecule can also be combined with an effector molecule to up‐ or downregulate gene expression.
1.1.1. ZFPs/ZFNs

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, there was a large focus on understanding transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA), the first eukaryotic transcription factor to be described. In 1983, researchers determined that zinc is required for TFIIIA function, 16 and in 1985 came the discovery that the zinc‐binding portions of the proteins are actually repeating motifs, independently folded to create finger‐like domains that grip the DNA. 17 This class of proteins is now referred to as zinc finger proteins (ZFPs), and several similar proteins have been discovered in the proteomes of a number of different organisms. Because each zinc finger recognizes three base pairs, 18 , 19 , 20 a peptide can be created to recognize a target gene by joining the appropriate zinc fingers in a linear fashion.

A 1994 paper describes a ZFP that was engineered to recognize and suppress an oncogene, as well as a ZFP that acted (in a different cell system) as a promoter of another gene by recognizing its activation domain. 21 The same paper suggests that ZFPs can be bound to effector proteins as a means of controlling gene expression.

Building on this idea, researchers fused a ZFP to the nonspecific cleavage domain of the Fok1 restriction enzyme. 22 The resulting heterodimer, known as a zinc finger nuclease (ZFN), can recognize a specific DNA sequence and produce a targeted DSB. As previously mentioned, these DSB can either be repaired via NHEJ, resulting in small indels, or HDR, which can be harnessed to insert an alternate or repaired gene. Fok1 must dimerize, so ZFNs must be created in pairs (one targeting the 3’ strand and the other targeting the 5’ strand) which improves target specificity—though efficiency remains relatively low (G‐rich sequences are especially difficult to target).

Ex vivo and in vivo delivery of ZFNs is relatively easy given their small size and the small size of the ZFN cassettes (which allows for the use of a variety of vectors). However, while ZFNs were certainly novel at the time they were developed, they are incredibly difficult and expensive to engineer, making them less practical in general than newer technologies.
1.1.2. TALEs/TALENs

In 2009, two different laboratories described a newly identified DNA‐binding motif: the transcription activator‐like effector (TALE), a protein secreted by the plant pathogen Xanthomonas. 23 , 24 Each TALE includes a DNA‐binding region composed of tandem repeats with repeat‐variable diresidues (RVDs) at positions 12 and 13; each RVD recognizes an individual nucleotide.

Like ZFPs, synthetic TALEs can be designed to affect gene regulation, 25 combined with effector proteins, or fused to endonucleases 26 , 27 , 28 to create TALE nucleases (TALENs); as with ZFNs, because Fok1 is the endonuclease used, TALENs must be created in pairs.

TALE nucleases are much larger than ZFNs, and so can be more difficult to deliver efficiently (especially in vivo). However, for myriad reasons (including the nature of their relative interactions with the DNA and the fact that each RVD recognizes a single base), TALE‐based chimeras (especially TALENs) can be built with higher specificity and greater targeting capacity than ZFP‐based chimeras. In addition, TALENs can be produced significantly more cheaply, easily, and with greater efficiency than ZFNs.
1.1.3. CRISPR‐Cas

In 1987, a laboratory in Osaka accidentally discovered an unusual palindromic repeat sequence in the E. coli genome they were studying, unique in that it was regularly interspaced. 29 These DNA motifs were further identified in various bacterial genomes by multiple laboratories over the next 20 years; their function, however, was still unknown. By 2005, three groups had independently determined that the spacer sequences were actually derived from phage DNA, 30 , 31 , 32 and the possibility of the genes playing a role in bacterial immunity was first suggested. 30 , 33 By this time, the scientific community referred to this unusual array as clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, or CRISPR. Meanwhile, researchers in the Netherlands had identified several other genes located near the CRISPR locus that appeared to be functionally associated with the CRISPR genes; 34 these would turn out to be the CRISPR associated proteins (Cas) that make up an integral part of the CRISPR‐Cas system.

In 2007, the CRISPR‐Cas system was identified as being a prokaryotic defense against pathogens. 35 As a part of a self‐/non–self‐determination mechanism of adaptive immunity, prokaryotes integrate a segment (generally 32‐38 base pairs) of phage DNA into their own genome, creating the spacers in the CRISPR arrays. After the CRISPR genes are transcribed, endoribonucleases cleave the resulting CRISPR RNA (pre‐crRNA), resulting in shorter RNA units composed of a single spacer sequence and the palindromic repeat (crRNA); depending on the organism, a trans‐activating crRNA (tracrRNA) may also be transcribed. The RNA forms a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex with the associated Cas proteins; any phage DNA containing the spacer sequence will be identified by the guiding RNA and cleaved by the endonuclease function of the Cas protein(s). The protospacer is the homologous sequence in the invading DNA, and is followed by a short protospacer adjacent motif (PAM); because the PAM is not incorporated in the CRISPR array, the CRISPR‐Cas complex is able to recognize the foreign DNA as non‐self (and thus will not cleave the prokaryotic cell's own DNA). 36

In 2012, Jennifer Doudna, Emmanuelle Charpentier, and others on their team engineered a synthetic chimera of the tracrRNA and crRNA (now known as single guide RNA, or sgRNA), which was able to direct Cas9 to create a targeted, site‐specific double‐stranded break. 37 By 2013, investigators had established that the CRISPR‐Cas9 was an effective, facile, and multiplexable method of editing the human genome. 38 , 39 , 40 , 41

Newer CRISPR‐based editing methods do not reply on unpredictable NHEJ or donor DNA. For example, endonuclease‐deficient Cas proteins can be fused to base‐editing enzymes; 42 first described in 2016, researchers have recently reported a high‐fidelity base editor with no off‐target mutations (OTMs). 43 Epigenetic techniques are also being explored using CRISPR‐Cas technology, 44 , 45 including linking endonuclease‐deficient Cas proteins to effector molecules. And prime editing addresses genetic disorders caused by multibase variances (such as sickle‐cell and Tay‐Sachs); in this case, the impaired Cas9 is fused to an engineered reverse transcriptase. 46

ZFNs and TALENs do maintain some advantages: CRISPR requires a PAM sequence, and sgRNA spacer sequences are usually only about 20 base pairs, meaning an inherently reduced targeting capacity (though researchers have recently begun exploring the effects of increased sgRNA length on cleavage efficiency and target specificity 47 ). CRISPR vectors are also necessary larger, making delivery more difficult. Overall, however, CRISPR is generally the preferred method of genetic and epigenetic manipulation, especially as improvements are made to the technology. CRISPR’s main advantage over its predecessors lies in the fact that rather than a complex protein as the DNA recognition molecule, the CRISPR system relies on a guide RNA. CRISPR kits are thus significantly cheaper, easier, and more efficiently produced than either ZFNs or TALENs.
1.2. Gene selection

Genetic selection happens in nature—natural selection is the mechanism that drives Darwinian evolution. Humans have also been practicing artificial selection for thousands of years, selecting for phenotypic traits when breeding plants and animals. New technologies have been developed over the last 53 years that allow selection of an embryo based on various criteria such as sex, ploidy, and polymorphisms.
1.2.1. Preimplantation genetic testing

Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) encompasses various techniques used to screen embryos prior to transfer. Originally all referred to as preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), there are actually three types of PGT: aneuploidy detection, now called PGT‐A; monogenic disorder detection, now called PGT‐M; and structural rearrangement detection, now called PGT‐SR.

Preimplantation genetic testing was ideated eleven years before the birth of the first in vitro fertilization (IVF) baby in 1978. Rabbit blastocysts were stained and observed using a fluorescence microscope; screening for sex chromatin allowed for the identification of the female embryos. 48 Because of the mutagenic potential of the preparation, the embryos were not implanted; a year later, cells from the trophoblasts of rabbit blastocysts were stained and sorted for sex, and the biopsied embryos transferred and allowed to grow to full term (at which point sex was confirmed). 49

Researchers then began to explore various methods of extracting a single embryonic cell for PGT: a blastomere biopsy (BB) removed during cleavage stage, 50 trophectoderm biopsy (TB), 51 and polar body biopsy. 52 Meanwhile, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was developed in 1985 and quickly recognized as a potential tool for PGT when it was used to amplify the portion of the β‐globin locus that includes the DdeI site (absence of which is diagnostic for sickle‐cell anemia). 53 The blastomere biopsy technique and PCR were brought together in 1990 when two human pregnancies were established using sex selected embryos to eliminate the risk of inheriting recessive x‐linked conditions. 54

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was the first cytogenetic technique to be used for PGT. Fluorochrome‐labeled site‐specific probes were hybridized to sample DNA, revealing aneuploidy and translocations; in 1993, two laboratories used FISH to identify X‐chromosomes, Y‐chromosomes, and aneuploidy. 55 , 56 However, the technique was limited by the number of chromosomes that could be assessed and by its inability to detect monogenic disorders.

Researchers then turned to comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) in 1999. 57 , 58 CGH can be thought of as competitive FISH: Sample and reference DNA are each labeled with a different color fluorophore, denatured, and allowed to hybridize to a metaphase spread. The DNA is then microscopically analyzed for differences in fluorescence intensity, indicating copy‐number variation (CNV).

While it was a vast improvement over its predecessor, CGH was time‐consuming (requiring embryos to be freeze‐thawed), labor‐intensive, and limited in its sensitivity. The next generation of CGH technology, array CGH (aCGH), addressed these limitations. 59 Like traditional CGH, aCGH allows for 24‐chromosome analysis; however, rather than human observation, fluorescence intensity evaluation is performed by a computer, locus by locus, with high specificity and resolution.

A number of other cytogenetic techniques for comprehensive chromosome screening (CCS) have since been developed: digital PCR (or dPCR, wherein a sample‐containing PCR solution is separated into tens of thousands of droplets and the reaction occurs separately in each partition), which can detect CNV, aneuploidy, mutations, and rare sequences; quantitative real‐time PCR (qPCR), in which a preamplification step prior to real‐time PCR allows for rapid detection of aneuploidy in all 24 chromosomes; single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array (which involves hybridizing fluorescent nucleotide probes to sample DNA and comparing the resulting fluorescence to a bioinformatic reference), which can detect imbalanced translocation, aneuploidy, and monogenic (and some multifactorial) disease; and next‐generation sequencing (NGS), the high‐throughput, massively parallel DNA sequencing technologies that allow for significantly quicker and cheaper sequencing than the Sanger method and make it possible to screen for everything from SNPs to aneuploidy.

Researchers and IVF laboratories use different combinations of FISH and/or the various CCS techniques.
1.2.2. Other prenatal testing

Often, IVF is not feasible, necessitating postimplantation prenatal testing (when indicated by family history and other risk factors). Amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling (CVS), and percutaneous umbilical cord sampling (PUBS) were initially paired with karyotyping, which can detect sex, aneuploidy, and some types of structural chromosomal disorders. Karyotyping was superseded by chromosomal microarray techniques (aCGH and SNP array) and, more recently, low‐pass genome sequencing, as these technologies allow detection of CNVs as well as aneuploidy. 60

Amniocentesis is a procedure in which an ultrasound‐guided needle is inserted transabdominally in order to aspirate amniotic fluid. Applications of amniocentesis extend beyond genetic testing, such as assessment of fetal lung maturity, detection of Rh incompatibility, and decompression of polyhydramnios (accumulation of amniotic fluids).

Prior to 15 weeks’ gestation, the prenatal testing method of choice is CVS, a technique that involves analysis of samples taken from placental tissue. The CVS procedure is ultrasound‐guided and can be performed either transabdominally or transcervically (associated with higher miscarriage rates). CVS carries the risks of miscarriage, amniotic fluid leakage, and limb reduction defects and is limited by the possibility of placental mosaicism and maternal cell contamination.

Percutaneous umbilical cord sampling is a rarely used procedure, performed between 24 and 32 weeks’ gestation, in which fetal blood from the umbilical cord is obtained. Because of the high potential for complications, PUBS is generally reserved for cases in which the pregnancy is deemed high‐risk for genetic disorders and other testing methods (amniocentesis, CVS, and ultrasound) are unable to provide the needed information or have been inconclusive. PUBS is also used to provide more information about fetal health (such as blood gas levels and infection).

In 1997, the presence of cell‐free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in maternal blood was established using PCR amplification with Y‐chromosome probes. 61 This led to the development of noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) of cffDNA. NIPT has been shown to be an accurate and sensitive technique for the detection of some aneuploidies (such as trisomy 21 62 ), less so for others. 63 Because cffDNA comes from the placenta, placental mosaicism can result in inaccurate results. Further, NIPT detects all cell‐free DNA in the mother's blood, including her own; maternal mosaicism or malignancies can also contribute to inaccuracies. As such, NIPT is considered a screening test, rather than a diagnostic test.
2. ETHICS OF GENE EDITING

On November 25, 2018, news broke that Jiankui He of Southern University of Science and Technology in Shenzhen, China had registered a clinical trial in which he planned to implant human embryos which had been modified using CRISPR‐Cas9. 64 Within days, the world learned that not only had edited embryos been implanted, two baby girls, Lulu and Nana, had already been born. 65

He used CRISPR‐Cas9 to create a nonspecific sequence alteration in the CCR5 gene. CCR5 is a seven‐transmembrane–spanning G protein–coupled CC chemokine (β chemokine) receptor. When expressed on the surface of a human T cell, CCR5 is the main coreceptor (along with CD4) for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). A naturally occurring 32–base pair deletion (with heterozygote allele frequencies of about 10% in people with European origin), known as CCR5∆32, has been shown to disable the protein; 66 heterozygosity of the CCR5∆32 allele has been shown to slow disease progression, while homozygosity significantly increases disease resistance. He's goal was to knock out CCR5, with the desired outcome of creating HIV‐resistant babies (it should be noted that HIV infection in CCR5∆32+/+ individuals has been increasingly reported, associated with X4‐trophic HIV strains—that is, strains that rely exclusively on coreceptor CXCR4 for endocytosis, rather than CCR5 67 ).

He presented the details of his investigation 68 at the Second International Summit on Human Genome Editing, being held “to discuss scientific, medical, ethical, and governance issues associated with recent advances in human gene‐editing research.” 69 While his manuscript describing the trial was not accepted by any publications, excerpts are available to the public, and various media outlets (and some experts) have been able to view the paper and supplementary data in their entirety. Enough is now known about He's work that it can serve as the basis of a conversation about the ethics surrounding germline gene editing. There are a number of issues—those inherent in the technologies themselves, as well as scientific hurdles that need to be overcome—before initiating clinical trials, to ensure that they are carried out as ethically as possible.
2.1. Not all sequence variations are created equally

CCR5∆32 has been researched extensively, but is one of only a few CCR5 variants studied. In his abstract, He claims that his team has reproduced this natural variant, but this is not the case: Two embryos were implanted, one of which (Nana) had frameshift mutations on both alleles (a 1–base pair insertion and a 4–base pair deletion, respectively) and the other of which (Lulu) showed a 15–base pair deletion on only one allele. Frameshift mutations have a high probability of disrupting protein structure (and thus function). The 15–base pair deletion, however, will result in five missing amino acids when the protein is translated, and its effect on the protein's function is unknown. He's team could have frozen the embryos, duplicated the sequence alterations in other cell lines, and tested whether or not the genetic changes actually conferred disease resistance, before actually implanting the embryos, but it does not appear that they made an effort to fully understand the actual effect of the alterations they had made. 64 With all of the risks associated with the CRISPR editing process, embryos should not be implanted if the scientists are unsure of the effects.
2.2. Mosaicism

A CRISPR‐Cas vector is inserted into a zygote soon after fertilization. If the CRISPR‐induced mutagenesis only occurred during the single‐cell stage, each successive round of cleavage would yield genetically identical cells. However, while the half‐life of the Cas proteins themselves may not be long, the vectors will remain and continue to be transcribed for days. During this time, the embryo will continue to divide, eventually forming a blastocyst of a few hundred cells. Uneven distribution of the plasmid and the RNPs means that there is a significant potential for mosaicism.

In He's laboratory, three to five cells were removed from each blastocyst, and their genomes sequenced. If Lulu's embryo were made up of identical cells (with one wild type allele and one with a 15–base pair deletion) as He had reported, the Sanger chromatogram should have shown two sets of peaks, approximately the same height. However, it appears likely that there were actually three different combinations of alleles: two normal copies, one normal copy and one with a 15–base pair deletion, and one normal copy and an unknown large insertion. Similarly, while Nana's embryo should have shown two alterations, the Sanger chromatogram revealed three. 70

The suspicion of mosaicism is borne out when sequencing of samples from the cord blood, umbilical cords, and placentas are reviewed. Just as with the embryo sequencing, rampant mosaicism is evident. It is reasonable to assume that the girls’ bodies are mosaic as well, but for an unknown reason, He's team did not test any cells from the girls themselves. 70 There is therefore the possibility that not all of the cells in Nana's body will have modifications to both CCR5 alleles, meaning it is possible that Nana is not actually resistant to HIV.

Mosaicism can have myriad effects: Even a few mutated cells in an organ can cause disease, a single cell can develop into a tumor, and any allelic variation in germ cells will be inherited by the following generation. There is no way to sequence a cell's genome without destroying the cell itself; as such, it is currently impossible to rule out mosaicism in a blastocyst.
2.3. Off‐target effects

As efficient as CRISPR is, there is a high probability of OTMs. He's team reported that in addition to the CCR5 gene edits, there was only one OTM, a 1–base pair insertion in a noncoding region of Chromosome 1 in Lulu's genome. This was based on their relatively limited sequencing, however; as noted above, mosaicism cannot be ruled out. (It should also be noted that there were flaws in the sequencing itself, so there may be other alterations that were missed in the screening, on top of the mosaicism. 70 )
2.4. Other consequences of target gene modification

When undertaking to knock out a gene in an embryo, it is vital to understand all of the functions of that gene.

CCR5 is a chemokine receptor that mediates leukocyte chemotaxis, and thus helps mount immune response. It is therefore unsurprising that homozygosity for the CCR5∆32 variant has been shown to be significantly correlated with more symptomatic infection and higher mortality rates in patients with West Nile virus, 71 influenza A, 71 , 72 and tick‐borne encephalitis. 73 It has also been shown to be associated with upregulation of certain CC chemokine ligands, and in turn associated with progressive reduction in survival time for patients with multiple sclerosis (MS). 74 Is it ethical to create a sequence variation that confers resistance to one illness, while increasing the likelihood of succumbing to another?

Public health conversations will need to change as well. It is possible, for example, that some with a CCR5 edit will engage in riskier sexual practices, or that some with a PCSK9 edit (which is associated with decreased levels of low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol, or LDL, in the blood 75 , 76 ) will be less likely to make behavioral changes such as increased exercise and diet modification.
2.5. Which genes/diseases to target?

Many who have viewed He's work have questioned why he chose to focus on CCR5 and HIV resistance. HIV prevalence in China is relatively low, 77 and current treatments can keep viral loads at almost undetectable levels. He stated that his research could help tamp down the HIV/AIDS epidemic; the most hard‐hit areas (such as Africa), however, would likely not gain much benefit from gene‐editing technologies.

Per a December 2018 poll, 78 Americans draw the line at so‐called enhancement, but favor the use of genetic engineering to address disease and disability. Which diseases and disabilities to target, however, is still an open discussion. Some questions that may help inform that decision: Should there be a focus on infectious disease resistance? Only fatal conditions? Will we decide that there is a need to quantify the degree of suffering? If an effective treatment already exists, should we still seek prevention through genetic modification? Is childhood versus adulthood onset of illness an important factor? Not all sequence variants are guaranteed to cause disease (eg, BRCA genes); should they be considered? What about orphan diseases? And should certain types of disabilities be prioritized over others?
2.6. OTHER ISSUES
2.6.1. Clinical research ethics

The history of research using human subjects has been blemished by unethical treatment of the subjects themselves. From Imperial Japan to the Tuskegee Institute, examples of atrocities committed in the name of medical science can be found across the world. As a result, a number of guidelines have been developed to facilitate ethical research going forward. 79 Nazi Germany engaged in abominable human experimentation during World War II; in 1947, the Nuremberg Military Tribunal (during which Nazi physicians and administrators were tried for war crimes and crimes against humanity) resulted in the Nuremberg Code, a statement aimed at preventing such abuses in the future. Stemming from a reaction to the same offenses, the World Medical Association produced Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects—known as the Declaration of Helsinki—in 1964 (it has been modified a few times since), which in 1982 was adapted by the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences into a manual, Proposed International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects, as a guideline for World Health Organization (WHO) member countries. (Individual countries have created their own guidelines, as well. In the United States, for example, the National Research Act of 1974 established the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research—often referred to as the Belmont commission—which issued the 1979 Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research, now known as the Belmont Report. The National Research Act of 1974 also established a set of regulations regarding human subject research; by 1991, after various updates and additions, the government decided that the regulations should become a “Common Rule” covering all federally connected research, codified in Title 45, Part 46 of the Code of Federal Regulations.)

This article will not delve into all of He's ethical missteps as regards his research (such as the fact that he registered the trial with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry in November 2018, after the twins had already been born). However, there are a few key issues, directly addressed by at least one of these major reports, which can be considered in terms of guiding future ethics discussions regarding gene‐editing clinical trials.

First and foremost, clinical trial participants should be informed of all of the associated risks and benefits. There is significant ambiguity as to the informed consent process in He's study. First, the experiment was misleadingly couched as an HIV vaccine trial. 65 , 80 It is also unclear how much the parents in He's study understood about risks such as mosaicism or increased susceptibility to other infections. The investigator is responsible for keeping participants informed throughout the study; it does not appear that in this case they were informed of the mosaicism present in both embryos (in his presentation at the human genome editing summit, He said only that the parents had been informed about one OTM 68 and does not even mention the mosaicism in his manuscript 70 ). It is likely that were the parents fully informed, they would have decided not to implant one or both embryos. This raises another question: Should parents be the ones to make such a decision, or is that the responsibility of the researchers and doctors?

The selection of the study participants is an issue, as well: The first inclusion criterion is that the participants must be a married couple wherein the husband is HIV‐positive and the wife is HIV‐negative. 81 Father‐to‐child transmission of HIV is rare (especially when the father is on antiretroviral therapy and the mother is on preexposure prophylaxis), but it is possible; for this reason, many couples opt for sperm washing (to separate the sperm from the virus), followed by either in vitro fertilization (IVF) or intrauterine implantation (IUI). While there is no explicit law against HIV‐positive parents accessing these procedures, it is unlikely that it would be approved by hospitals’ ethics committees. 82 Chinese couples often travel to other countries (such as Thailand) for the procedure, but it can cost hundreds of thousands of yuan. 83 The couples selected for He's study may have seen participation as their only chance to have children—indeed, He described the father as having “lost hope for life.” 68 This makes them particularly vulnerable to exploitation. (This may also have informed their decision to implant both embryos rather than just the one that had alterations to both alleles.)

Study participants should be able to voluntarily withdraw from the research at any point; He's informed consent form stipulates that were the couple to withdraw from the study (at any point between the implantation of the embryo in the first IVF cycle and 28 days postbirth), they would be responsible for reimbursing the laboratory for all project costs (and that if reimbursement was not received within 10 calendar days of withdrawal, a substantial fine—more than the average annual income of a Chinese citizen—would be imposed). 80 This is sufficiently cost prohibitive as to prevent a subject from withdrawing from the study.

It is unclear whether He's research actually underwent an ethics review process: In his manuscript, He claims that the Medical Ethics Committee of the Shenzhen Harmonicare Women's and Children's Hospital approved the study in March 2017, but only elaborates by stating that his team was “… told that the committee held a comprehensive discussion of risks and benefits… During the study, the director of the ethics committee was constantly updated about the state of the clinical trial.” 84 The hospital has since denied that the study was reviewed at all, and claims that the signatures on the approval were forged. 85 What is clear is that a number of regulations were violated or circumvented, including the guidelines for embryo research which allow an edited embryo to be cultured for no more than 14 days and prohibit its implantation, 86 as well as the aforementioned limitations on assisted reproductive services for HIV‐positive parents. 82 It is likely that He switched blood samples and kept many of the IVF technicians and obstetricians in the dark as to the nature of the study to get around these issues. 87

Finally, it is reasonable to consider whether He was qualified to be the investigator on such a trial: He had published one paper about CRISPR (in 2010, before human gene editing was an application of the technology), his background was in physics (he crossed over into biophysics), and he had no medical training. This is especially concerning as biohackers have made available both the equipment and the basic blueprints for home CRISPR editing (see the Other Perspectives section)—including advice on how to obtain human embryos and eventually implant them. 88
2.6.2. Socioeconomic disparities

Multiple polls have shown that the majority of people around the world are opposed to the use of genetic engineering of embryos for enhancement, such as athletic ability and intelligence, or for altering physical characteristics, such as eye color and height. 89 It is easy to conceive of the risk of a new age of eugenics.

But even the application of genetic modification to address medical needs holds the potential for establishing inequality. The technology will remain incredibly expensive for some time, prohibitively so for most people. CCR5 edits lie in an ill‐defined area between medical need and enhancement; an unfair health advantage will be established if such modifications are only accessible to the wealthy. Other kinds of edits may mean the difference between life and death; should potentially life‐saving therapies only be available to those with financial means? Put another way, should those individuals on one side of the growing socioeconomic gap be the only ones protected from the suffering that comes with illnesses such as Alzheimer's disease, Huntington disease, or cystic fibrosis?
2.6.3. Possible stigma

Especially while the concept is still novel, it is difficult to predict how society will feel about gene‐edited babies. Will Nana and Lulu face any sort of backlash? Conversely, if and when gene editing becomes commonplace, will there be a stigma associated with not having been edited in some way, such as still being susceptible to various infectious diseases? Might children like Lulu be less accepted for not carrying a desired modification? He wanted to spare HIV‐infected individuals’ children the stigma and discrimination their parents endured; 90 it is possible that having edited genes has replaced one potential stigma with another.
2.6.4. Insurance

Because gene editing will be a tool to cure and prevent illness, insurance coverage will be an important part of the conversation. First, will insurance cover the editing itself? If so, will germline versus somatic cell editing be an important distinction? Will coverage be based on the targeted illness or disability (and expected associated costs)? And who will decide which edits are considered medically necessary and which are considered elective?

Once babies born from edited embryos are born, more questions arise. Will those whose genes have not been edited to prevent certain illnesses be considered to have preexisting conditions? Will they be expected to pay more for coverage? On the other side of the coin, will those who have had their genes edited (especially when the technology is first rolled out) pay more because of possible off‐target risks or potential negative consequences of editing (eg, the increased susceptibility to influenza associated with CCR5 editing)?
2.6.5. Other perspectives

A full discussion of ethics requires a balanced presentation of various points of view.

There are those who object to continued research into gene editing, especially in zygotes, for myriad reasons. For example, some feel that gene editing is “playing God” and that it is not man's role to make changes to the basic building blocks of humanity; others are concerned about the potential that the technology, once perfected, could be co‐opted to produce designer babies; there is the consideration that opening a market for human eggs for research could lead to exploitation of disadvantaged women; and still others have concerns similar to those who are opposed to embryonic stem cell research—such as the conviction that embryos should not be created for the purpose of research, or that un‐implanted embryos (which they consider potential life) should not be destroyed.

There are also those who believe that not only should research continue, but that even nascent technology such as gene editing should be accessible to the public. 91 Known as biohackers, these scientists and activists laud the efforts like Jiankui He's. 88 Educational and laboratory materials are currently available to essentially anyone. It is even possible to purchase CRISPR kits, 92 and while a new California law requires that such kits are labeled “not for self‐administration” 93 there are currently no laws prohibiting people from doing just that—in fact, the owner of one company was investigated by the California Medical Board for unlicensed practice of medicine after injecting himself with CRISPR, but the investigation was dropped after four months with “no further action… anticipated.” 94
3. GLOBAL DISCUSSIONS ON GERMLINE EDITING

While it is impossible to mandate that all countries follow the same set of guidelines, it is possible to establish guiding principles for the risk‐benefit analyses and ethical discussions each country will undertake in developing their own regulatory framework. Because science moves faster than regulation, the scientific community as a whole can also use these principles to help guide ethically charged research decisions where no regulations yet exist. To that end, various groups have been meeting all over the world to try to come to a consensus on how to proceed with germline editing research and the potential clinical applications thereof.
3.1. Before He’s announcement

In 2015, the International Bioethics Committee (IBC), part of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), released the Report of the IBC on Updating its Reflection on the Human Genome and Human Rights. 95 The report considers other technologies as well, but “recommends a moratorium on genome editing of the human germline.”

Also in 2015, investigators in China announced that they had successfully used CRISPR to edit a nonviable human embryo. 96 This inspired the first International Summit on Human Gene Editing, held December 2015 in Washington, D.C. Hosted by the US National Academy of Sciences, US National Academy of Medicine, the Royal Society of the UK, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the summit brought together more than 3500 stakeholders (500 in person and 3000 online) from around the world to discuss human gene editing. At the end of the summit, the organizing committee released a statement advising ongoing global engagement and discussion, and outlined their conclusions regarding gene editing: 97 “(i)ntensive basic and preclinical research is clearly needed and should proceed, subject to appropriate legal and ethical rules and oversight…”; “(m)any promising and valuable clinical applications of gene editing are directed at altering genetic sequences only in somatic cells… [and] they can be… evaluated within existing and evolving regulatory frameworks for gene therapy…”; and “(g)ene editing might also be used, in principle, to make genetic alterations in gametes or embryos…” The statement goes on to address the ethical, legal, and scientific questions surrounding germline editing that have yet to be answered, and warns:

    It would be irresponsible to proceed with any clinical use of germline editing unless and until (a) the relevant safety and efficacy issues have been resolved, based on appropriate understanding and balancing of risks, potential benefits, and alternatives, and (b) there is broad societal consensus about the appropriateness of the proposed application. Moreover, any clinical use should proceed only under appropriate regulatory oversight. At present, these criteria have not been met for any proposed clinical use: the safety issues have not yet been adequately explored; the cases of most compelling benefit are limited; and many nations have legislative or regulatory bans on germline modification. However, as scientific knowledge advances and societal views evolve, the clinical use of germline editing should be revisited on a regular basis.

While this statement in no way gives a green light for trials such as He's, it also does not call for an outright moratorium. In March 2017, another Chinese team published the results of the first use of CRISPR in viable human embryos. 98 Less than two years later, He's work was revealed to the world.
3.2. After He’s announcement

The article about He's trial was published the day before the second International Summit on Human Gene Editing. As they had at the first summit, organizers released a concluding statement on the last day. Surprisingly, not only does the statement again fall short of calling for a moratorium on clinical use of gene editing, the language is even softer than that of the first summit statement:

    The variability of effects produced by genetic changes makes it difficult to conduct a thorough evaluation of benefits and risks. Nevertheless, germline genome editing could become acceptable in the future if these risks are addressed and if a number of additional criteria are met. These criteria include strict independent oversight, a compelling medical need, an absence of reasonable alternatives, a plan for long‐term follow‐up, and attention to societal effects. Even so, public acceptability will likely vary among jurisdictions, leading to differing policy responses.

    The organizing committee concludes that the scientific understanding and technical requirements for clinical practice remain too uncertain and the risks too great to permit clinical trials of germline editing at this time. Progress over the last three years and the discussions at the current summit, however, suggest that it is time to define a rigorous, responsible translational pathway toward such trials.

In December 2018, seeing the need for a more substantial framework of regulatory guidance, the WHO established the Advisory Committee on Developing Global Standards for Governance and Oversight of Human Genome Editing, “a global, multi‐disciplinary expert panel to examine the scientific, ethical, social and legal challenges associated with human genome editing… tasked to advise and make recommendations on appropriate institutional, national, regional and global governance mechanisms for human genome editing.” 99 They have established the Human Genome Editing Registry to collect information on human clinical trials involving genome editing, and the WHO has supported the advisory committee's interim recommendation that “it would be irresponsible at this time for anyone to proceed with clinical applications of human germline genome editing.” 100

In 2019, the US National Academies of Medicine and Science, together with the Royal Society, convened the International Commission on the Clinical Use of Human Germline Genome Editing. The goal of commission is: 101

    … with the participation of science and medical academies around the world, to develop a framework for scientists, clinicians, and regulatory authorities to consider when assessing potential clinical applications of human germline genome editing. The framework will identify a number of scientific, medical, and ethical requirements that should be considered, and could inform the development of a potential pathway from research to clinical use—if society concludes that heritable human genome editing applications are acceptable.

The commission's final report is scheduled to be released in the spring of 2020.

As the science progresses, there are clearly significant conversations yet to be had.


Ethics of Designer Babies
By: Sarah Ly
Published: 2011-03-31

A designer baby is a baby genetically engineered in vitro for specially selected traits, which can vary from lowered disease-risk to gender selection. Before the advent of genetic engineering and in vitro fertilization (IVF), designer babies were primarily a science fiction concept. However, the rapid advancement of technology before and after the turn of the twenty-first century makes designer babies an increasingly real possibility. As a result, designer babies have become an important topic in bioethical debates, and in 2004 the term “designer baby” even became an official entry in the Oxford English Dictionary. Designer babies represent an area within embryology that has not yet become a practical reality, but nonetheless draws out ethical concerns about whether or not it will become necessary to implement limitations regarding designer babies in the future.

The prospect of engineering a child with specific traits is not far-fetched. IVF has become an increasingly common procedure to help couples with infertility problems conceive children, and the practice of IVF confers the ability to pre-select embryos before implantation. For example, preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) allows viable embryos to be screened for various genetic traits, such as sex-linked diseases, before implanting them in the mother. Through PGD, physicians can select embryos that are not predisposed to certain genetic conditions. For this reason, PGD is commonly used in medicine when parents carry genes that place their children at risk for serious diseases such as cystic fibrosis or sickle cell anemia. Present technological capabilities point to PGD as the likely method for selecting traits, since scientists have not established a reliable means of in vivo embryonic gene selection.

An early and well-known case of gender selection took place in 1996 when Monique and Scott Collins saw doctors at the Genetics & IVF Institute in Fairfax, Virginia, for in vitro fertilization. The Collins’ intended to conceive a girl, as their first two children were boys and the couple wanted a daughter in the family. This was one of the first highly publicized instances of PGD in which the selection of the embryo was not performed to address a specific medical condition, but to fulfill the parents’ desire to create a more balanced family. The Collins’ decision to have a “designer baby” by choosing the sex of their child entered the public vernacular when they were featured in Time Magazine’s 1999 article "Designer Babies". Though the Collins’ case only involved choice of gender, it raised the issues of selection for other traits such as eye color, hair color, athleticism, or height that are not generally related to the health of the child.

Prior to the Collins’ decision to choose the sex of their child, The Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs released a statement in 1994 in support of using genetic selection as a means to prevent, cure or specific diseases, but that selection based on benign characteristics was not ethical. Some ethical concerns held by opponents of designer babies are related to the social implications of creating children with preferred traits. The social argument against designer babies is that if this technology becomes a realistic and accessible medical practice, then it would create a division between those that can afford the service and those that cannot. Therefore, the wealthy would be able to afford the selection of desirable traits in their offspring, while those of lower socioeconomic standing would not be able to access the same options. As a result, economic divisions may grow into genetic divisions, with social distinctions delineating enhanced individuals from unenhanced individuals. For example, the science-fiction film Gattaca explores this issue by depicting a world in which only genetically-modified individuals can engage in the upper echelon of society.

Other bioethicists have argued that parents have a right to prenatal autonomy, which grants them the right to decide the fate of their children. George Annas, chair of the Department of Health Law, Bioethics, and Human Rights at Harvard University has offered support for the idea of PGD, and the designer babies that result, as a consumer product that should be open to the forces of market regulation. Additionally, other arguments in favor of designer baby technologies suggest that parents already possess a high degree of control over the outcome of their children’s lives in the form of environmental choices, and that this should absolve some of the ethical concerns facing genetic selection. For example, parents keen on establishing musical appreciation in their children may sign them up for music classes or take them to concerts on a regular basis. These choices affect the way a child matures, much like the decision to select certain genes predisposes a child to develop in ways that the parents have predetermined are desirable.

The increased ability to control and manipulate embryos presents many possibilities for improving the health of children through prenatal diagnosis, but these possibilities are coupled with potential social repercussions that could have negative consequences in the future. Ultimately, designer babies represent great potential in the field of medicine and scientific research, but there remain many ethical questions that need to be addressed.

Elective IVF gains traction. Doctors have concerns.

    Carly Mallenbaum

Add Axios on Google
Collage of culture dishes being prepared to collect eggs egg retrieval surrounded by radial lines

Photo illustration: Sarah Grillo/Axios. Jens Kalaene/picture alliance via Getty Images

In vitro fertilization has exploded across America. The number of babies born through assisted reproductive technologies — most of them via IVF — jumped 45% from 2013 to 2022.

    A more recent part of the surge is elective IVF — still a small share of overall IVF cycles — in which people who could conceive naturally choose IVF to screen embryos for genetic traits linked to cancer risk, IQ, height and more.

Why it matters: It's becoming big business, with screening companies promising "generational health." But doctors warn that the science behind embryo scoring for complex conditions is shaky — and could push would-be parents toward major medical and emotional decisions based on unproven data.

    Plus, elective IVF is reopening old debates about "designer babies," and the ethics of hand-picking certain traits for future children.

Catch up quick: Some types of PGT (preimplantation genetic testing) for embryos used in IVF aren't new — but they've gained popularity in the last few years.

    PGT-A (for aneuploidy) screens embryos for chromosomal abnormalities, such as those linked to Down syndrome. It's something patients with older eggs and/or a history of miscarriage might consider. These tests can also determine sex.
    PGT-M (for monogenic) screens for rare single-gene diseases, like Tay-Sachs. It's widely supported by major medical organizations for people who know they're carriers.
    Now, companies are offering the newest type, PGT-P (for polygenic), which uses DNA databases from adults to estimate an embryo's genetic predisposition to conditions that aren't driven by just a single gene. It's the most controversial of the bunch.

Zoom in: The polygenic tests can cost several thousand dollars on top of IVF, which can total tens of thousands more.

    Companies can assess risk for a number of conditions, including autism, Alzheimer's, Type 2 diabetes, arthritis and schizophrenia.

State of play: It's an "emerging consumer phenomenon" for people who don't have fertility issues or known genetic risks to do "elective IVF for the purposes of having a healthier, taller [child], whatever 'best' is to them," says Kian Sadeghi, CEO of genetic testing startup Nucleus Genomics.

    His company screens not only for cancers and other health concerns, but for traits like height, IQ and male-pattern baldness.

He said he'd understand if his own mother had chosen to implant an embryo projected to be taller than he is (he says he's 5 feet, 6 inches) — and compares that decision to opting to have your child take human growth hormone or break their bones to get taller.

    "No needles, no surgeries, no blood, no expensive therapies, no invasiveness. [Instead, with PGT-P,] you can help shape height or cancer risk from the beginning with just software," he tells Axios.

Between the lines: The use of adult DNA data to make major decisions about embryo selection with PGT-P makes some doctors and bioethicists uneasy.

    "We just don't have a high enough correlation between genes and disease for me to feel good about offering" PGT-P, says Ruth Lathi, an OB-GYN professor at Stanford University School of Medicine who's studied PGT-P.
    "This test could potentially falsely rank or even discard embryos based on these scores that are not proven in today's environment," she tells Axios.
    And she worries polygenic testing could strain the IVF system, making it harder to access for those who truly need it.

Reality check: IVF itself is an invasive and stressful process that involves weeks of hormone shots, surgeries and long waits. If you're doing that purely to be able to give embryos a polygenic screening test, you're introducing a lot of stress "with no proven benefit," Lathi says.

"Not ready for prime time" is the way New York fertility doctor Lucky Sekhon would characterize PGT-P technology. Even as someone who did PGT-A testing for her own embryos, she says she wouldn't opt for PGT-P.

    And she doesn't advise that her fertility preservation patients do the genetic tests on their frozen embryos before trying to get pregnant on their own, because for most people it's "not really giving you an edge or advantage."

But genetic counselor Maria Katz of Orchid Health, which offers polygenic health screening for a number of health concerns (but not traits like height and IQ), argues that the tests can still be valuable.

    "The way I counsel patients is: 'If an embryo has an elevated flag, it doesn't mean that it'll go on and develop disease," she says. It just means there's "increased risk."
    She adds that banning or discouraging the technology entirely starts to "lean into paternalism."

Zoom out: The rise of polygenic testing is also raising flags about so-called "designer babies." Beyond the ethical questions and sci-fi-inspired concerns, bioethicist J. Benjamin Hurlbut of Arizona State University thinks the bigger issue is relational.

    He warns that embryo screening technologies risk redefining how parents relate to their future children — turning what should begin as love and anticipation into evaluation.
    In his view, the right question isn't, "Is embryo genetic screening good technology?" but, "Is it good for a parent-child relationship to begin this way?"

What we're watching: Beyond technology used to select human embryos, scientists are also developing — and debating — ways to edit the genes of human embryos.

